---
title: You don't need another course
date: 2023-07-11T03:22:28-05:00
draft: false
toc: false
images:
tags:
  - untagged
---

# You DON'T need ANOTHER course

Some months ago I was required to learn Docker in depth. As a first and almost
automatic action, I remember opening Google and searching "Best Docker courses".
It was fun because just a couple of seconds later, I remember thinking "Why am I
searching for a Docker course instead of its documentation?".

It's very common in this "don't stop learning" tech culture that we think about
courses as a way to produce both new knowledge and something certifiable that
makes us more "employable" or "inviting" for companies. And that's okay, and up
to some degree, it makes sense, but... Have you ever thought about what the cost
of that is?

Coming back to my introductory situation, once I returned to myself, I searched
for the Docker documentation, just to see if that could be a good place to learn
from. Result? I found an amazing, comprehensive, and very well-structured
documentation that I could easily follow because, at the end of the day, Docker
is not so far from a virtual machine (a concept that naturally grew in my mind
while learning how to run Excel or some Windows game in Linux with Wine). That
allowed me to learn everything I was requiring to know about Docker REALLY fast,
as I already had the criteria to select chunks that could be meaningful to me,
and set aside the ones I already knew or didn't require at the moment.

On the other hand, and just a week later (the time it took me to make that great
skimming of the Docker documentation), I was also required to learn about a
completely new topic to me: Asynchronous programming. Because of my recent
discovery , I thought "well... I know how to program. Maybe I can look at the
docs and learn what AsyncIO has to offer me". Huge mistake.

After being stuck for more than one week, I noticed that my advance had been
very close to zero, with most of my understanding on the matter sparse, weak,
and superficial. Then I found a beautiful website called superfastpython.com,
where a very experienced person created an introduction to Python concurrency in
a smooth and gentle course-like style. The result? In three days, most of the
concepts I had struggled with in the previous week were now well-positioned in a
good, meaningful mental framework about what, how, and why of each of them. Not
entirely positive, I also learned about how much time I unnecessarily spent on
things that were not going to help me with my at-the-moment necessities.

From these two weeks' experiences, I learned a couple of things that, although
obvious in some sense, are not very frequent to stop and think about:

1. In most cases, you only need a course when you are either learning a
   completely new topic, or (with the same spirit) you're going very deep into
   some matter. Because you require guidance in how to connect very new and
   disruptive ideas (respecting your base knowledge), and those new ideas need
   to settle down in your brain, you must expect those courses to have a
   (relatively) slow learning pace; as well as the risk of being guided by
   someone who is not interested in the same things you are, so you will spend
   some time learning things you neither need nor will remember later.

2. When you are going from a well-learned topic into another close enough
   (Python/Java/Haskell -> Ruby/Scala/Elm, VMs -> Docker, Differential calculus
   -> Integral calculus), and because you already have a good enough base
   criteria to guide your learning path, you will be better served by
   self-learning resources (call it the project documentation, a book, a
   spreadsheet, or any other). This will be A LOT faster too, as all you need to
   do is to take what you need, and learn in what aspects that knowledge is
   DIFFERENT from what you know. A much easier and lightweight mental process
   than the previous one, and one that enables you to start working as quickly
   as possible.

If like me, you like to have good theoretical backing, the concepts of
"Accommodation and Assimilation" by Piaget
(http://web.archive.org/web/20160305015224/http://www.learningandteaching.info/learning/assimacc.htm)
are good places to start looking.

I would really like to know if some of you have experienced something similar,
have reached similar conclusions, or even if you don't agree with any of my
conclusions . Let me know what you think!
